# A2.1 Network Fundementals 
Describe the purpise and characteristics of networks 
Describe the purpose, benefits and limitations of modern digtial infrastructure 
Describe the function of network devices 
Describe the network protocols used for transport and application 
Describe the functions of TCP/IP model (HL)

## A2.1.1 purpose and characteristics of networks 
A network is a connection of computers with the purpose of exchanging information. The computers can be connected through a cable or wireless connection. 

The different types of networks are based on how large each area they cover geographically, and how large the network itself is. 

### LAN: Local area networks 
Network of computers that are interconnected in a small geographical location, limited to single property such as a home, building or campus. 

A common way for computers to cocnnect to each other is through a switch. A switch is a central wiring point with multiple ports so that two or more computers can connect to each other to create a network. This is a LAN network, its a private network found in restricted geographic location. 

### WAN 
These computers can only communicate and exchange data with each other. If the computer wish to connect to another network, such as the internet. They would need to contact a internet service provider(ISP). The internet service provider would provide a device called a gateway (modom router combo). 

Once the gateway is connected, the computers in the LAN can access and be a part of a wide area network, or a WAN. 

##### WAN is a LAN that is connected to an or external network(s). A WAN is a series of LAN connections connected to each other by servers or gateways.  

WAN is a wide area network that spans over a large geographical area such as a contry, continent or the globe. The internet for example is a WAN (wide area network).

### PAN 
PAN is a personal area network, they are a small network that is used on a personal level. It connects to devices such as computers, servers, switches & printers. 

They connect to each other using wireless technologies like bluetooth, infrared, and NFC(Near Field Communication). 

They can also connect using a wired connects like a USB cable.

PAN is used for transferring small files such as music, photos, calendar appointments and so on.

### VPN 
A VPN is a virtual private network. A VPN establishes a secure and reliable network connection over a unsecure network such as the internet. It protects your internet activity and identity as you surf the internet. 

When you set up an internet connection, your ISP (internet service provider) will set up your internet connection. This means that internet activity is routed through your ISP servers.

This means, your ISP can see and log the users internet activity. This would not be a problem is the ISP keeps your activity private, however there is a possibility that your ISP could share your information with third party organizations and or even the governemnt. 

This means that your internet activity is no longer private. 

With a VPN server, your data will be redirected from the ISPs server to its VPNs server. This means that your internet providers or any other party can no longer see your activity.

This will now be the source where all internet activity will go. 

Benefits:
1. A VPN desguisses your IP address 
When you order internet service from a provider, they assign an IP address. The unique IP address is attached to your home or business.

When you use a VPN, your IP address can no longer be seen by websites. The only visible IP address is sof the VPN server. Effectively hiding your identity, giving users anomality. 

2. A VPN will encrypt and protect your internet data
When accessing the internet, data that is send and recieved from the user is broken down into a bunch of smaller data packets. 

The data packets travels across the public internet and are sent to its destination. 

But when travelling across the internet, and if your using public Wi-Fi networks, it can be intercept by ISP servers, governemnts and hackers.

However using a VPN, the data transmittion by the VPN is encapsulated by adding an extra layer of protection to each data package called as tunneling.

So any activity you do on the internet is kept encrypted and private through a virtual tunnel provided by a VPN.

3. A VPN enables the access of restricted(geographical) internet content

Certain video content may only be accessible in certain countries while be restricted in others. Your greographical information can be decoded by the internet from your IP address. 

With VPNs, you can select from different VPN servers across different countries that change your IP address, changing your location and gives acess to restricted internet content.

4. Secure connection for remote workers
Works that work from home and outside the office need access to the files at the main office.